Citation: Abbas, Raza et al. 2011, JFCST 8:041013
DOI: 10.1115/1.4003635
Source text: full text

Ghazanfar Abbas 1
Department of Physics,
Bahauddin Zakariya University,
Multan, 60800, Pakistan;
Department of Physics,
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology,
Islamabad 44000, Pakistan;
Department of Energy Technology,
GETT Fuel Cell Laboratory,
KTH,
Stockholm 100 44, Sweden
e-mail: mian_ghazanfar@hotmail.com
Rizwan Raza
Department of Physics,
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology,
Lahore 54000, Pakistan;
Department of Energy Technology,
GETT Fuel Cell Lab,
KTH,
Stockholm 100 44, Sweden
e-mail: rizwanr@kth.se
M. Ashraf Chaudhry
Department of Physics,
Bahauddin Zakariya University,
Multan 60800, Pakistan
e-mail: shaifo313@gmail.com
Bin Zhu
Department of Energy Technology,
GETT Fuel Cell Laboratory,
KTH,
Stockholm 100 44, Sweden
e-mail: binzhu@.kth.se
Preparation and Characterization
of Nanocomposite Calcium Doped
Ceria Electrolyte With Alkali
Carbonates „NK-CDC… for SOFC
The entire world’ s challenge is to ﬁnd out the renewable energy sources due to rapid
depletion of fossil fuels because of their high consumption. Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs)
are believed to be the best alternative source, which converts chemical energy into
electricity without combustion. Nanostructure study is required to develop highly ionic
conductive electrolytes for SOFCs. In this work, the calcium doped ceria (Ce0.8Ca0.2O1.9)
coated with 20% molar ratio of two alkali carbonates (CDC-M: MCO 3, where M =Na
and K) electrolyte was prepared by coprecipitation method. Ni based electrode was used
to fabricate the cell by dry pressing technique. The crystal structure and surface morphology were characterized by an X-ray diffractometer, scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The particle size
was calculated in the range 10–20 nm by Scherer’ s formula and compared with SEM and
TEM results. The ionic conductivity was measured by using ac electrochemical impedance spectroscopy method. The activation energy was also evaluated. The performance of
the cell was measured 0.567 W /cm2 at temperature 550°C with hydrogen as a fuel.
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4003635]
Keywords: electrolyte, low temperature (400–600°C) fuel cell, nanostructure, alternative
power source
1 Introduction
The emission of CO 2 due to exploitation of a huge amount of
fossil fuel has formed seriously global environmental problems
[1]. The next generation requires alternative energy sources because these fossil fuels’ resources are running out with the passage
of time. In the past decade, many researchers made large efforts to
search an alternative energy source, which could fulﬁll the demand of new generation [2]. Renewable energy is one of the best
because it never runs out and can be replenished in a short period
of time. Renewable sources are abundantly available in the universe such as solar, wind, biomass, water, etc. [3]. Fuel cell is a
device that converts chemical energy into electricity directly in the
presence of fuel. In addition, it also provides heat and power.
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs)can have a huge positive impact on
the next generations’ energy technology and “hydrogen economy”
[4]. Solid oxide fuel cells have a lot of attraction in the recent
years due to their high efﬁciency, great tolerance to impurities,
ﬂexibility, and diversity of fuels [5–8]. Conventional SOFCs work
at high temperature in which yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ)is
used as an electrolyte; this YSZ material requires high temperature as 800–1000°C to obtain mandatory high ionic conductivity.
This high temperature operation prevents the SOFCs from being
commercialized because it causes the degradation of the cell components, thermal expansion mismatch, limited choice of materials,
etc. [9–15]. Doped zirconia and doped ceria have been selected as
electrolyte materials for SOFCs [16]. In order to commercialize
the use of SOFCs, it is necessary to reduce its operating temperature. The cell operating temperature depends on electrolyte internal resistance and activation energy; so for lowering the temperature, it is essential to reduce its interfacial/internal resistance and
activation energy. These problems can be worked out by developing alternative electrolyte materials that possess high ionic conductivity at low temperature and minimum electrode polarization
resistance [17–19]. The ceria is a rare earth metal, which possesses reliable ionic conductivity at relatively low temperature in
the range 400–600°C. But pure ceria is a poor ionic conductor so
its ionic conductivity can be improved by doping with bivalent or
trivalent oxides such as calcium, samarium, gadolinium, etc. [9].
The ion doped ceria is a major candidate to reduce the operating
temperature [20].
From these more common doping elements Ca2+ is the cheapest
element and easily doped with ceria. Therefore trivalent
Sm3+ /Gd3+ can be replaced with Ca2+ bivalent element. Although,
single phase calcium doped ceria (CDC)electrolyte conductivity
is low relative to gadolinium doped ceria (GDC)and samarium
doped ceria (SDC)electrolytes but by coating the alkali carbonates such as sodium (Na)and potassium (K), the conductivity of
composite ceria oxide electrolytes can be enhanced at low temperature in the region 400–600°C [21].
The single phase ion doped SOFCs have been developed years
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the Advanced Energy Systems Division of ASME for publication
in the JOURNAL OF FUEL CELL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Manuscript received October
14, 2010; ﬁnal manuscript received December 13, 2010; published online April 1,
2011. Editor: Nigel M. Sammes.
Journal of Fuel Cell Science and Technology AUGUST 2011, Vol. 8 / 041013-1
Copyright © 2011 by ASME
Downloaded From: http://fuelcellscience.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/ on 06/16/2015 Terms of Use: http://asme.org/terms
ago, e.g., GDC and SDC. Single phase ceramic electrolyte materials in solid oxide fuel cell, i.e., doped ceria electrolyte working
at intermediate temperature 600–800°C, has made great technological success but still there are a lot of problems in its commercialized production [22–26]. High cost due to high working temperature is a major problem. In order to overcome this problem,
two phase nanostructure electrolyte materials have been introduced by Nanocomposite for Advanced Fuel Cells Technology
(NANOCOFCs)[26–29]. Ionic conductivity increases by approaching the nanostructure technique. Accordingly, nanocomposites can be deﬁned as the circulation of a second (or even third )
phase, with nanoparticles’ size in a matrix that can be amorphous
or crystalline. This shows that it is possible that these nanoparticles perform an important role to increase conductivity with
Lewis acid-base interactions between the surface states of the ceramic nanoparticle with both the polymer chains and the anion of
the alkali salt [27]. Second phase coated named as core shell on
electrolyte material helps ions to transport from the way of the
interface (electrode to electrolyte and vice versa ). This second
phase can be obtained by coating alkali carbonates (M2CO3,
where M=Li, Na, K, etc. )on the electrolyte materials. In consequence, Ce 4+ changes into Ce 3+ in ceria-composite electrolytes,
which become the cause of partial reduction in conductivity, but
the presence of alkali carbonates as second phase can effectively
suppress the electronic conduction of CDC [21,27].
SDC-Na2CO3 nanocomposite electrolyte was synthesized and
1.150 W /cm2 power density was achieved at 500°C, which is
about 50% low operating temperature and slightly greater power
density than YSZ [28,30,31]. Xia et al. [32]reported that a ternary
ionic conduction salt–ceria-composite electrolytes (SCCEs)
named SDC using (Li/Na/K)2CO3 as coating material were prepared by oxalate coprecipitation method, and ionic conductivity
was found 0.1 S/cm at 600°C in air and 1.7 W /cm2 power density was found using hydrogen at the anode side and binary
CO2 /O2 at the cathode side.
The present research work focuses on binary alkali carbonates
that are coated on a calcium doped ceria-composite electrolyte
material; here Ca +2 has been used instead of Sm +3 or Gd+3. This
calcium creates more oxygen vacancies in electrolyte material.
This composite provides material structure, surface morphology,
ac impedance method for ionic conductivity, and cell performance
with Ni based electrodes prepared in our laboratory.
2 Experiment
2.1 Electrolyte Powder Preparation. Nanostructure (Ce0.8
Ca0.2 O1.9 and Na 2CO3 :K 2CO3)NK-CDC, i.e., nanocomposite
powder, was prepared by coprecipitation method. Cerium nitrate
hexahydrate Ce(NO3)3.6H2O (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO )and
calcium nitrate tetrahydrate Ca (NO3)2.4H2O (Sigma Aldrich,
USA)were the starting materials. The calcium nitrate tetrahydrate
powder was mixed with cerium nitrate hexahydrate according to
desired stoichiometry amount of 1:4 molar ratios. These two powders were dissolved into 1000 ml of de-ionized water under a
vigorous stirring process with 800 rpm at 80°C initially. Alkali
carbonates M 2CO3, i.e., sodium carbonate Na 2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich, USA )and potassium carbonate K 2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich,
USA)powders, were mixed as 1:1 (molar ratio)and dissolved into
500 ml de-ionized water under 1000 rpm at 100°C for 30 min.
Then solution of both carbonates was poured drop by drop into
solution of CDC according to ratio of CDC:NK as 1:2.5 molar
ratios and continue for more2ha t 1200 rpm. Heating temperature
of stirrer was controlled at 150°C ﬁnally. The pH value was noted
to be 9. The precipitate was soaked three times with de-ionized
water followed by vacuum ﬁltration and obtained NK-CDC agglomerate. In order to dry this agglomerate was kept in an oven at
100°C over night. At last, this dried powder was sintered in a
digital furnace at 700°C fo r4ht og e t dense nanocomposite electrolyte. This sintered powder was grinded in a mortar with a pestle
to obtain homogeneity.
The conventional Ni based electrode was prepared by solid
state reaction method and sintered at 800°C for 4 h. This anode
was mixed with electrolyte in weight ratio of electrode: electrolyte: active carbon 80:19.5:0.5.
2.2 Cell Fabrication. The solid oxide fuel cell was fabricated
by dry pressing technique. NK-CDC nanocomposite electrolyte
was pressed between two layers of anode (Ni-NK-CDC)and cathode (Ni-NK-CDC)by hydraulic press at the rate of 200 kg /cm2.
For a single cell test a small pellet of size 13 mm diameter was
made having an active area of 0.64 cm 2. The cell thickness was
0.8 mm followed as anode layer 0.35 mm, electrolyte layer 0.25
mm, and cathode layer 0.2 mm. The pressed pellet was sintered at
650°C for 40 min only. Both of the external surfaces “anode and
cathode” of the cell were painted by silver paste as current collector to get I-V and I-P characteristics of the cell.
2.3 Ionic Conductivity Measurement. In order to measure
the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte material, a pellet of 13
mm diameter and 3 mm thickness was fabricated and sintered at
700°C for 1 h. The silver paste was painted on both sides of the
pellet to facilitate good electrical contact. Ionic conductivity was
measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
method in both air and hydrogen atmosphere implementing Auto
VERSATAT 2273(Princeton Applied Research, Oak Ridge, TN ).
The frequency is varied from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz. The conductivity
was calculated using the formula
sigma= L
RA
where sigmais the ionic conductivity, L is the thickness of the cell, R
is the internal resistance, and A is the active area of the cell.
2.4 Fuel Cell Performance. The fuel cell performance was
measured by providing hydrogen as a fuel at the anode side and
oxygen at the cathode side under variable resistance load using
fuel cell testing unit (L-43, China ). Under each resistance load,
the data of open circuit voltage (OCV)and current was recorded
in the temperature range 400–550°C and I-V curves were drawn.
From these results, power density also was calculated and current
verses powers (I-P curves)were also drawn. Computerized instruments were used to complete the measurements, data collections,
and result handling processes in our measurements. The H 2 gas
ﬂow rate was used in the range of 110 ml/min at 1 atm pressure.
3 Characterization
3.1 X-Ray Powder Diffraction. X-ray diffraction (XRD)patterns of the electrolyte material were recorded to determine the
crystalline structure at room temperature using a D/Max-3A
Rigaku X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kalpharadiation (lambda
=1.5418 Å ), 35 kV voltage, and 30 mA current. The crystallite
size (Dbeta)was calculated from line-broadening measurements
from the (111)peak of NK-CDC, using Scherer’s equation.
Dbeta= 0.9lambda
betacos theta
where lambdais the wavelength and betais the full width half maximum
(FWHM).
3.2 Microscopic Analysis (SEM and TEM). For microscopic view and analysis of the prepared NK-CDC electrolyte,
SEM (Philips XL-30 )was used. The detailed microstructure
analysis and morphology including the size, shape, and arrangement of the particles, which make up the specimen, as well as
their relationship to each other on the scale of atomic diameters,
was performed by high resolution TEM (HRTEM)(JEOL JEM-
2100F).
041013-2 / Vol. 8, AUGUST 2011 Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded From: http://fuelcellscience.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/ on 06/16/2015 Terms of Use: http://asme.org/terms
3.3 Result and Discussions. Figure 1 shows that the sintering
temperature 700°C developed well crystallinity of the NK-CDC
powder. The NK-CDC prepared by the coprecipitate method contains the only cubic ﬂuorite structure type CeO 2 (JCPDS 34-
0394). The cubic ﬂuorite structures, such as zirconium, ceria, and
thorium, are to be considered good oxygen conductors and mostly
used in SOFC [33]. The XRD pattern shows that the calcium is
fully doped in the ceria. Although the sodium and potassium carbonates were used for second phase on the CDC but there is no
other peak in the pattern of the product. The small shift in the
ceria peaks is due to introduction of CaO into CeO 2 as a doping
element. The oxidation of Ce +4 into Ce +3 occurred during the
sintering process. The particle size was calculated from the ﬁrst
peak (111)and was found to be 12 nm, which compared with the
SEM and TEM results.
Figure 2 shows the morphology of structure and size of particle.
It has been analyzed that the electrolyte has a good morphology
and homogeneity. In the SEM picture, there are some particles
having a loop of whiteness around the composite CDC in the
same shape, which can be known as an alkali carbonate layer
around the particles and is named core shell as observed in previous work [28]. The particle size was observed in the range 10–15
nm. The purpose of this alkali carbonate core on CDC composite
powder as a second phase is to provide a route to O− ions from the
cathode side to the anode side. Due to introducing two phase
nanocomposite electrolyte, the conductivity and performance of
the cell enhance.
Figure 3 shows the TEM analysis of particles, each particle is
shown signiﬁcantly, it has seen that CDC particles are in crystal
form, while the alkali carbonate layer (as coated phase )is amorphous. The detailed structural analysis and a study of interfaces
using HRTEM will be carried out in some future work.
Figure 4 shows that the ionic conductivity in air atmosphere is
grater than hydrogen atmosphere and this difference is noted in
the temperature region of 550–600°C. Both conductivities were
about the same at lower temperature less than 500°C. The conductivity result shows that this composite is dual phase oxygen/
proton conductor. It is already discussed in the introduction part
that pure ceria is a poor conductor; however, its conductivity can
Fig. 1 XRD pattern of NK-CDC electrolyte sintered at 700°C
Fig. 2 SEM image of NK-CDC electrolyte
Fig. 3 TEM analysis of NK-CDC: „a… CDC and „b… alkali layer
Fig. 4 Ionic conductivity as measured in hydrogen and air
atmosphere
Journal of Fuel Cell Science and Technology AUGUST 2011, Vol. 8 / 041013-3
Downloaded From: http://fuelcellscience.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/ on 06/16/2015 Terms of Use: http://asme.org/terms
be enhanced by doping with bivalent or trivalent elements. The
second phase of alkali carbonates provides the best highway to
ions to transport from cathode to anode. Banerjee et al. [34]reported that calcium doped ceria electrolyte (having composition
Ce0.8 Ca0.2 O2− delta)shows a maximum conductivity 1.29
x10−2 S /cm at 600°C. This CDC composition is similar to that
used in this present work except the addition of sodium-potassium
carbonate. In this present work, the conductivity was found to be
0.1 S/cm, which is higher than the above reported by Banerjee et
al. This means the presence of sodium potassium as a second
phase has helped to increase the conductivity of the electrolyte.
Arrhenius plot is drawn in Fig. 5 (a)to ﬁnd out the activation
energy for the ionic conduction of the electrolyte material. To
determine the activation energy of the material, the linear ﬁtting
technique was carried out for both air and hydrogen atmosphere in
temperature range 400–600°C. Linear ﬁt curve is shown in the
inset of Figs. 5 (b)and 5(c), respectively. Activation energy of the
material is calculated by using the formula
sigma= A
T exp− Ea
kT
where sigmais ionic conductivity, A is pre-exponential factor, k is
Boltzmann’s constant,T is absolute temperature in Kelvin, and Ea
is the activation energy. A chemical reaction starts on the basis of
activation energy. This value is calculated as 0.20 eV and 0.52 eV
at air and hydrogen atmosphere, respectively. It can be seen that
the electrolyte conducts electricity in the presence of either air or
hydrogen. This means NK-CDC is a dual phase conductor that
conducts through negatively charged oxygen ions or through
protons.
Figure 6 shows the fuel cell performance. Hydrogen is used as
a fuel at its anode side at a rate of 1 ml/min and oxygen is at the
cathode side as oxidant. The value of OCV was observed to be 1.0
V , 0.923 V , 0987 V , and 0.96 V at 550°C, 500°C, 450°C, and
400°C, respectively. The maximum current density and power
density were calculated as 1726 mA /cm2 and 567 mW /cm2 at
550°C, respectively.
4 Conclusion
Nanocomposite electrolyte material NK-CDC prepared by the
coprecipitation method shows good ionic conductivity of 0.1 S/cm
at 600°C and cell performance of 567 mW /cm2 at 550°C. Alkali
carbonate core shell basically enhances the conductivity of the
electrolyte because it has been observed that isolated ceria is a
poor conductor and by doping with bivalent or trivalent oxides, its
conductivity increases, so in this study ceria is doped by Ca. The
second phase alkali carbonates construct a highway for the transportation of ions such that O − ions move from the cathode side to
the anode side at comparatively low temperature. The nanostructure was obtained by sintering at 700°C because this temperature
developed a well crystalline structure of the electrolyte material.
The introduction of CaO into CeO 2 is due to a small shift in the
ceria peaks. The oxidation of Ce +4 into Ce+3 occurred during the
Fig. 5 „a… Arrhenius curve for measurements of activation energy under hydrogen and air atmosphere, „b… linear ﬁt at hydrogen atmosphere, and „c… linear ﬁt at air atmosphere
Fig. 6 Fuel cell performance
041013-4 / Vol. 8, AUGUST 2011 Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded From: http://fuelcellscience.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/ on 06/16/2015 Terms of Use: http://asme.org/terms
sintering process. This work will encourage a new approach to
design and develop supersonic conductors for low temperature
solid oxide fuel cell (LTSOFC)era.
Acknowledgment
One of the authors (G.A.)acknowledges the ﬁnancial support
by the Higher Education Commission, Pakistan under International Research Support Initiative Program (ISRIP)to complete
this work. They also acknowledge the ﬁnancially support of
Swedish Agency for Innovation Systems (VINNOV A)and Swedish Energy Agency (STEM)through GETT Fuel cells AB industrialization projects.